[Transcript missing]
I want to thank you all for
coming this early in the morning
to talk about something so
wildly exciting as the kernel.
Okay, what are we going to talk
about in this session?
Well, mostly we're going to talk
about the Mach kernel,
what the basics of the Mach kernel are,
what the basic abstractions are,
when you want to program to those,
when you don't, but most importantly,
how the Mach kernel and its environment
affects the rest of your development.
For the majority of you,
you may be bringing over
a Carbon application,
and for a lot of those applications,
you fix a couple of things that
the Carbon data tells you are
wrong with your application,
and you're done.
But you're not,
because things don't behave exactly
the same on X as they do on IX,
and a lot of those differences are based
on what happens in the Mach kernel.
And so we want to give you a
little background about what's
happening under the covers so
you can understand your app.
Okay, you're probably kind of
tired of seeing this picture,
but it's basically the layout
of all applications in Mac OS X.
Your application is going to
fall into one of the basic
categories of a classic app,
a Carbon app, or a Cocoa app.
At the bottom of that
is the Darwin layer.
And inside the Darwin layer is
where the Mach kernel resides.
The Mach kernel is the
foundation of the OS.
It provides the basic abstractions
for getting the system running,
things that
Your task and your threads.
The CPU and memory
abstractions of the system.
Mach is intended to provide a rich set
of semantics for those kinds of services.
One of the things you'll find is that
Mach was intended to develop lots of
different operating systems on top.
It was originally designed as a
foundation for Unix operating systems,
but then other operating
systems came along,
people provided DOS boxes
running on top of Mach,
provided specialized operating systems
or embedded environments on top of Mach,
and over the years the Mach semantics
have become richer and richer and
a little bit more formal each time.
And that ends up giving you a set of
semantics that let us do some things in
Mac OS X that you wouldn't otherwise see.
Mach is, you know,
intends to be policy neutral.
It leaves the policy decisions
to higher layers of software.
In our situation,
a lot of those policy decisions end up
in being implemented in the BSD layer.
Some bubble up in the higher layer,
so Classic has some of
its own policy decisions.
They use Mach services,
but the Mach services
try to be policy neutral.
They give you a set of mechanisms,
but not the policy.
So what, that's what Mach is.
What Mach isn't is an operating system.
Alright.
Mach is just the foundation for
building operating systems on top.
Mach does not provide I/O.
We have I/O Kit for that,
and it provides those
set of abstractions.
Mach does not provide any networking.
Although people have taken Mach and
networked some of the Mach services,
Mach itself does not provide
any network services.
Mach doesn't do file systems,
as you saw yesterday if you
were in the file system session.
The file systems are implemented
inside the BSD layer.
Mach doesn't do any
security policies either.
Again, Mach tries to provide mechanisms.
It provides lots and lots
of security mechanisms and
some really fundamental ones.
But it makes no decisions
about how they get applied.
In our situation,
a lot of those policy decisions
again fall to the BSD layer.
So you're going to see that we use the
BSD style of user ID and permissions.
BSD then restricts your access to certain
Mach resources based on those attributes.
But the Mach services really are all
based on whether you have access to
those services and don't care who,
what your user ID is or what permissions
you have or who you logged in as.
We basically have a set of services,
a set of access points,
and if you're granted access to
those services by the policy maker,
the decision maker, in this case BSD,
then you get to have access.
Otherwise not.
Mach doesn't really provide
application APIs either.
While you may dip down sometimes into the
Mach APIs in some of your applications,
you're not going to be
programming to Mach itself.
Mach is intended to be the layer that the
operating system pieces converse with.
All right,
and all of those abstractions that
we just talked about are actually
provided in higher levels of Mac OS X,
or Darwin.
Okay,
so why are we doing this Mach thing?
It's the number one
question people ask when,
in the Darwin mailing lists or otherwise.
Why Mach?
Well,
we do have a complex system in Mac OS X.
We have lots of
environments to program to.
We have the classic environment,
the Carbon environment,
the Cocoa environment.
We have BSD, we have I/O Kit,
we have Java.
Others are coming that people
may be working on in here.
People are doing DOS emulators or doing
other environments for this system.
Each of these has a set of
semantics and policies that they
implemented and they control,
and they cannot change.
It's legacy.
Mach provides a set of abstractions
that sits below a common
layer that sits below those,
that allows you to
implement all of those.
It's been tuned over the years
to give a fairly good match
to each of those environments.
There are some environments which
people have tried to put under Mach,
or on top of Mach,
and haven't had such a good match.
But for all of the ones that,
that traditional operating systems
and the new Java VM and those things,
there's been a lot of work to
tune those layers between Mach and
those environments to provide a,
a good match,
a good impedance match between them.
But Mach does more than that.
It makes sure that those services
are consistent across each other,
so that a Carbon application using
memory in a certain way doesn't,
doesn't destroy a Classic application
doing the same thing,
or a BSD application
doing the same thing.
Another reason for Mach.
Again, 15 years now, Mach is nothing new
to the research world.
It's new to Mac OS X,
but it's to the Mac OS environment,
but it's been around for 15 years now.
Lots and lots and lots and
lots and lots of research.
Obviously the original research done
at Carnegie Mellon was intended to
prove that you could build an operating
system by defining a layer underneath
that provided the basic services and
layering the operating system on top.
More work was done at
the University of Utah,
kind of jumping forward in time.
They took the Mach work that had been
done before them and tried to make
it more modular and embedded and add
a bunch of real-time services to it.
And then a lot of research was done at
the Open Group/Open Software Foundation,
depending upon your time frame.
There are research institutes,
both in Cambridge and in Grenoble,
France.
Lots and lots of real-time work done
for government contracts and otherwise.
And as some of you may know,
OSF focused a lot of their
research on cluster work,
building up complex systems
out of modular boxes.
A single system image, if you will,
across many, many boxes.
And there was a lot
more research in Mach.
Mach was one of the first
publicly available source codes
for something other than Unix.
Most people had been using BSD in
the research community forever.
But if you've tried
to do research on BSD,
you realize that there's a lot of knots
and a lot of things tied together in
BSD that makes it difficult to pick
a piece out and do your research and
replace it with a different piece.
Mach is really good at
allowing pieces of the system,
higher level systems, to be picked apart.
And replaced.
So a lot of that research
occurred on Mach.
And most of that research is
available to us and to others.
And we've been picking pieces,
select pieces of it to
include in Mac OS X.
And another obvious reason.
If, for some of you that don't know,
Avi Tavenian, Dr.
Avi Tavenian, our senior VP of software,
was one of the original authors of Mach.
And obviously he has a fondness for it.
But that's not a misplaced fondness,
in my opinion.
Okay, so which Mach?
If we're going to choose Mach because
it allows us to build complex systems,
multi-environmented systems on a
single box that maintain consistency
and yet provide good performance
to each of the environments,
there are several Machs to choose from.
Lots of research produces lots of Machs.
The original Mach, Mach 2.x,
most of you probably know
the 2.5 version of Mach.
It's the one that originally got out
from CMU and found its way around.
It was that,
the original work at CMU to decide,
to prove that you could build
a layered operating system,
that there were common services
underneath of those that a
traditional operating system provides,
and that you could formalize those.
But Mach 2.5 was monolithic in nature.
It was a layer underneath
of BSD inside of BSD,
if you will.
They picked apart some of the pieces,
but built it as a single unit.
Areas where that kind of showed through
the most is the virtual memory system.
They provided an abstraction for
virtual memory inside of Mach,
but the lower levels of that
virtual memory system had hard-coded
dependencies on what BSD did
for file systems and the like.
It also had hard-coded dependencies
to a lot of the other parts of BSD for
signal handling and the like that
was kind of intertwined with Mach.
And I/O, it had direct dependencies
on BSD I/O style.
That kernel was also not really
available in a form useful for SMP.
And when they did the work,
their main goal was to see if we could
take a Unix operating system with Unix
current real-time constraints and see if
we can implement it in a layered fashion.
They did not try to extend
it in any real-time fashion.
Next in the horizon was Mach 3.0.
And again,
that was started at CMU to say,
"Can we take this a little bit further?
Can we formalize the rest of the
interfaces so that we have no dependence
between the Mach portion of the
kernel and the rest of the kernel?"
So they formalized all those
interfaces which had been in
2.5 hard coded dependencies.
So they ended up with a more
modular architecture as a result.
And there was a lot of work that
occurred once this basic work happened.
There was a lot of research that
came along in the areas of real
time and in the areas of MP.
And most of that work got folded back in.
Some of it didn't.
There was a bunch of
work at CMU on real time,
if any of you are familiar with Dr.
Takuda's work on real time.
A lot of that did not get directly
into the standard Mach 3.0 base,
but found its way in over time
through various other projects.
And Mach 3.0 was where MP became
a very formal part of the system.
And of course that's
quite interesting to us.
Okay, Mac OS X, the server product,
and the Darwin zero dot variants
of the operating system were based
on that original Mach 2.5 work.
It included, if any of you have looked
at the Darwin source,
a lot of the features,
the niceties at the user
level from the Mach 3.0 work.
A lot of the Mach 3.0 IPC interfaces
and the like had been brought forward
by Apple and others into that kernel.
internal.
Mostly by next, but we, we
picked a lot of that up at Apple,
and that was in the Mach,
the server kernel.
For Mac OS X,
and you've got to excuse me, I'm,
a lot of times I'll say Mach OS X,
a bias.
[Transcript missing]
Basically, a lot of distribution was
what they were going after.
But we had,
there was a bunch of work going
on at OSF also to fold back in
some of the research that had
been happening at other places.
After CMU stopped working on Mach 3.0,
a lot of the Mach work drifted
over to University of Utah.
And they were working
on their Mach 4.0 base,
which actually wasn't, wasn't, wasn't,
wasn't
A lot of people think 4.0 may
be more advanced than 3.0,
but it's not.
It just had different goals and
they chose a new name because
3.0 had been used so much.
So a lot of that work from that
environment had been brought back by
OSF and integrated into their kernels,
but not the ones that they
made publicly available,
the ones that were used internally
and given to their partners.
Well, when we started our work,
we had that code brought back and
merged with the work we had done
with our Mac Linux Mach 3.0 kernel,
and that became our base.
So in essence,
we actually pulled a lot of that
private code that had been done at
OSF and only available to OSF partners,
and through our licensing of that,
have made it available into
the public source again,
where it had not been available before.
And besides the work that we
had done on Mac Linux at Apple,
we have done lots and lots and
lots of things to it since then,
and you'll see some of that
work in the further slides.
Okay, so, a lot of people say,
but that Mach 3.0 thing,
it's inefficient.
I've heard it.
Everyone tells me it's inefficient,
because the general goal of Mach 3.0 was,
in order to prove that you could
have the Mach kernel providing
a rich set of abstractions,
we wanted to be able to prove that you
could run the Mach kernel separate from
the other environments in the system.
So BSD ran as a user level
task in that environment.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so how do you guys access all
these powerful abstractions that
allow all of these funny things,
all these wonderful things
to happen in Mac OS X?
Well, for the most part, you don't.
Most of the Mach abstractions are
used directly by lower layers of
software than the application.
So for the most part you should
be programming to Carbon,
to Classic, to Cocoa,
and sticking at those layers,
even BSD or Java, and using those.
If you need to get a little
bit lower in the system,
a little more detail and
a little more control,
you're typically going to drop
one layer down from that and
maybe you're going to access some
core foundation things directly,
some bundle stuff,
or access some of the CF run
loop stuff in the system.
Right.
But you're going to possibly
stop at the CF level as well,
the core foundation level.
Or you're going to use
I/O Kit to do things.
Or you're going to use the
BSD file system extensions,
or you're going to use the
BSD networking extensions.
But typically you don't end up
having to program to Mach directly.
Okay.
If you do program the Mach directly,
one thing you've got to
realize is it's not portable.
If you drop,
if you have a Carbon application
that tries to reach under
the covers and access Mach,
that obviously,
that Carbon application is not
going to go directly back to 9.
There are tricks you can play with
Gestalts and trying to load extensions
and load bundles to do some of that work,
and if you really need to, you can do it,
but again,
it won't be portable and you've
got to go out of your way.
Some of these interfaces are
not final at the Mach level.
As we build up the
Mac OS X environment with all the
stacks coming up now to their,
pretty much their final form, right,
we're taking a look at the
abstractions that Mach provides and
we're trying to find more efficient
paths and better matches to the
semantics of all those environments.
So we're tweaking them
a bit as we go along.
You're gonna see some of that work happen
between now and when the product's final.
And so some of these interfaces
are gonna change on you.
But again,
the majority of them are correct and,
and final, or reasonably final.
There aren't gonna be that many changes.
So then why should I care about Mach?
Right.
You care about Mach because you need to
understand how your application works.
You need to understand how
the frameworks are built.
Um, mostly so that when you go to
debug your application and you,
you see that all of your threads
are blocked in a certain location,
oh, what does that mean?
Why would that happen?
And you need to understand
how your application and those
frameworks might interact.
And a lot of the things that you
will see end up being Mach things.
So what are these wonderful
abstractions that lets us build
all these different environments?
Tasks and threads are, are fairly common,
fairly well understood abstractions.
In Mach, a task owns all resources
for an application.
So all resources are task-wide.
Every thread inside a task,
then you have threads.
Threads are the unit of execution,
the things that the
operating system schedules.
and virtual memory provides protection
for loads and stores to your application.
Then once we build up all
of those environments,
that gives you all the isolation
that Mac OS X is supposed to
give you to a Carbon application,
let's say.
You've now got a nice
isolated application.
It's got its own private
virtual address space.
It's got its own set of resources.
They're protected into the task itself.
And you've got another
Carbon application on the other side.
Now, for the first time,
you've got to have formal ways
of communicating between them.
Right,
you used to be able to cheat and poke
this location in memory and check
that when you're coming around your
next loop in the Carbon application
if you need two to communicate.
Right, but now they're isolated.
So you need some formal way
for them to communicate.
And so there's a formal task-to-task
communication mechanism in Mach.
Okay, so a Mach task, as I said before,
owns all resources.
It sets up an environment
for threads to run.
All your threads have equal access
to all of the task resources.
There are other resources available,
so virtual memory and a port namespace,
and we'll get into what the port
namespace is in a little bit.
Virtual memory,
I think most of you understand.
It's a protected address
space for each application,
each task.
But there are other resources
associated with a task.
We won't get into them too much,
but there's task-wide exception handlers,
and a bootstrap server
reference for a task.
That's basically how a task
understands what kind of task it is.
When Mach gets a task created,
all Mach tasks kind of look alike.
So how do you distinguish
a Java task from a,
A Carbon task.
Well, a lot of that happens
through the bootstrap server.
The task,
very first thing it does when it executes
is go converse with its bootstrap
server and that gives it some of its
original primordial references to things.
And then it bootstraps itself up from
that and all of a sudden becomes one
of the environments or the other.
So when you look in Mac OS X,
you're gonna have your application,
maybe it's a Carbon application.
Well each Carbon application
is actually a BSD application.
It's a BSD process.
And a BSD process has two basic
sets of resources with it.
The Mach task part and,
and file descriptors.
There's other BSD resources,
shared memory ID, um, space and the like,
but most of the things in BSD processes
are file descriptors or tasks.
You end up with that environment.
But inside a Mach task you have multiple
threads executing in a single task,
sharing a virtual memory
space and a port name space.
The thread.
The thread's the unit
of execution in Mach.
They're preemptively
scheduled against each other.
This is how Mac OS X gives
you preemptive scheduling.
Mach does all of the scheduling
work for those threads.
Carbon and Classic don't have
to do their own scheduling work.
Again, they have equal access
to the system resources.
An important thing to note,
at the Mach level,
a thread is nothing more than a register
state and some scheduling attributes.
There's no such thing as a stack to a,
to a thread at the Mach level.
We don't care whether
there's a stack there or not.
You give us a register
state to start the thing,
we start it running,
we'll preemptively schedule it,
take it off the processor,
restart it at that state.
Something else is responsible
for doing those other layers.
Right.
So this is what a,
a thread ends up looking like.
Each application in Mach is
going to have threads,
multiple threads.
Each in Mac OS X, each of those threads
actually is a POSIX thread.
And the POSIX thread is the part
that's responsible and does the work
to allocate the stacks and set up
things that you would expect from
a higher level concept of a thread.
And even inside of that,
in a Carbon application when you
have preemptively scheduled threads,
or sorry,
cooperatively scheduled threads in Mach,
in Carbon, those are Pthreads
which are Mach threads,
and Carbon does some work to make
sure that Mach schedules them in
a way that they look like they're
cooperative rather than preemptive.
One of the things you also
have to be careful when you're
developing your applications,
you may create a simple
Carbon application today,
single threaded Carbon application,
and you go and you look in the
debugger and lo and behold there
are two or three threads in there.
Where'd those other threads come from?
Well they're actually
created by the frameworks.
The frameworks sometimes have
to create threads to bridge the
gap between the semantics of the
services below them and what the
Carbon application may expect up above.
So you're going to end up with some
threads that you're not aware of,
and you're going to have to worry about
those when you're doing your debugging,
so be aware they come.
A lot of the work we're doing for
semantic matching is trying to
eliminate some of those worker threads.
And all of our tools are thread aware.
So you're going to see that our
debuggers will show you dumps and
tracebacks of all the threads.
Our sampler tool will show
you what your thread is doing,
but it'll also at the same time show you
what the worker threads that are provided
by some of the frameworks are doing.
And so you end up with
a picture like this,
that you have Mach threads.
Mach threads are wrapped at user level by
P threads to provide stacks and the like.
Inside of a Carbon application
you may have those thread manager
threads like I talked about that are
cooperatively scheduled against each
other through the assistance of Carbon.
But you then have MP threads
which are free to run and execute,
and Mach is the only
one who schedules those.
So obviously if you're worried
about getting true MP performance
and true parallelism,
the Carbon guys are trying to push people
a little bit towards the MP threads.
If you're doing a Cocoa application,
all of the Cocoa threads
are POSIX threads.
There's no cooperatively
scheduled notion in those,
so you don't have to worry about
the cooperatively scheduled part.
What's new for threads in Mach,
in Mac OS X versus server and
Darwin 1.0 versus previous Darwin's?
Well, Pthreads replaces Cthreads.
Cthreads was something that was
explicitly for Mach from way back when.
Pthreads are a more standard version
of a lot of the same services,
so we've switched to Pthreads.
We also have scheduling
frameworks in the Mach 3.0,
or in the Darwin 1.0 and
Mach 3.0 code that we've got.
Scheduling frameworks allow for different
scheduling policies for threads,
rather than just the standard timeshare
scheduling policy that's trying
to gain fair access to everything.
There's also some fixed priority
real-time scheduling policies in there,
and you can select those from user state.
And one of the big things,
obviously on the PowerPC processor,
is G4 support for
Velocity Engine is now in.
What's coming soon for threads?
Additional real-time work,
additional policies,
isochronous policies that some people
are looking for are being investigated,
no promises,
but we're looking into those.
There's been a lot of research in Mach,
again, with being able to leverage work
that other people have done.
Real-time priority inversion avoidance.
A lot of the work that came from
the University of Utah was about
trying to avoid those situations
for real-time applications where
you're dependent upon a resource and
that resource is currently consumed
by some other thread in the system,
one that you don't really care about,
but you've got to wait for it.
And that thread may be so low a
priority that it's not actually
making any progress to get rid
of its hold on that resource.
And so the system-wide approach of
promoting those threads in order,
so that they could let go of
their resources and then let the
high priority thread continue
is something that's being,
extended--it's already in the code base
that you're looking at now in Darwin 1.0,
but it's being extended
and deployed system-wide.
In kernel preemption,
it's something that was built in to
the Mach 3.0 code that we've got.
It's currently disabled,
but it's there and
enabled and it will be,
or, enableable, and it will be turned
on in the near future.
Another service in
Mach is virtual memory.
Again, it provides a protected address
space for each application.
It provides a flexible way to
construct those address spaces.
And it allows for controlled sharing.
Don't go hog wild,
because Mach lets you do sharing,
jumping down there and
doing wild sharing.
We do sharing in a
controlled way in Mac OS X.
One of the key features of virtual
memory in Mach is copy on write behavior.
If you look at each Carbon application,
you can almost consider a
Carbon application as a unique
instance of the Mac OS X environment.
A lot of the frameworks that used
to get loaded once in Mac OS X,
or sorry, in Mac OS 9,
get loaded into each
application as it starts.
If each application had to have a
unique copy of those frameworks,
it would have to be loaded
into the Mac OS X environment.
It would take forever to load.
It would be huge amounts of
memory that would be required.
So Mach provides a way to flexibly
share those spaces and to flexibly
provide copy on write semantics to those.
So that unless you modify a page,
you get to share a common page.
But as soon as you modify it,
only that one page gets to
be a unique copy for you.
And that's done lazily, as you touch it,
rather than up front.
So when you look at the
virtual memory system,
each task ends up having its
own virtual memory space.
And inside that virtual memory space is
little regions of mapped memory objects.
Well what do you map as a memory object?
Well for most of you,
you make calls to frameworks and
they do this magically for you,
but let's take an example where you map
a file descriptor under a BSDM map call.
That file gets converted
to a memory object,
an abstract memory object,
inside the kernel.
Won't go too much into that,
but there's a general concept
called an abstract memory object.
When you map that into an address space,
the kernel creates an object
called a virtual memory object.
It's the manager of the cache of
that data associated with that file.
So we don't bring the whole file in,
we don't even know what the file is,
but we know that there's some object
that we have to cache data for.
And so we create a virtual
memory object for it.
And as you touch pages or access
locations in your address space,
we bring in some of those
pages and cache them,
and then make them available
to your application.
So here's an example of that.
Now I've come along and touched,
in that second page,
I've touched a location.
And when I do it, that causes a fault in
the operating system,
right, at the lowest level.
That gets translated into,
we look up the address space,
we look up the mapping, the region,
and describe,
figure out which object and which
range of that object and with
which permissions you have access,
and we go and check the
virtual memory object.
In that page we just map it into your
address space and everything's fine.
There's only one version
of that data in the cache.
If you were in the file
system session yesterday,
you heard some of the ways that
we make sure that not only are we
maintaining it at the VM level,
but we also maintain
consistency at the file level.
But sharing isn't the only thing we do.
As I said before,
you've got a situation where
You don't want to have to bring
in whole copies of things that
you want unique copies of.
So the data section for each file
or framework that you have loaded.
We don't want to bring that all
in at process initialization
or at task initialization time.
So we want to do copy on write.
We want to access the original object
as much as possible and only copy,
bring in unique copies of
pages for those that we modify.
So here's the situation
of how that works.
When you map something copy on write,
rather than having a direct
reference to the object,
there's a new object that gets
created and stuck in the middle.
Alright.
And when you take a write
fault on one of the pages,
All right,
we go to that virtual copy object.
It, instead of going directly to its, its
abstract memory manager at
first checks the thing that
it's a virtual copy of and says,
"Do you have that
page?" And in this case,
it's really that second page
that we just talked about,
and of course he does.
So he sends us a copy of that page back,
and we cache only that one copy page,
and we make that available.
So as you run a bunch of
the tools in the system,
you're going to see
things like private pages,
alias pages, virtual pages, right?
The private pages are those things which
we have pulled our unique copies of.
At the lower level below
that abstract memory manager,
what happens there?
Well, as I said before,
typically each one of those
things is a file that got mapped,
and so those go through the VNode
pager and they access the BSD file
system directly for each file type.
But there's also those other kinds
of objects which aren't files.
Those things,
when you allocate memory or you just
did one of those copy operations,
we end up creating some
magical data for you.
A new object that you didn't know about,
nobody really has an explicit handle to.
All of those objects are actually
managed by a pager in the
system called the default pager.
And what he does is takes
all of those objects and the,
since they are very sparse objects,
they have a one page touch,
maybe at the beginning of the object,
and another page touch way
down inside the object,
you know, at offset ten thousand.
We don't want to create unique files for
each one of those objects you've created.
There are thousands of
these in a running system.
So he creates the default pager,
creates a set of swap files, right,
and maps those data,
that data from those sparse objects,
down into a swap file and writes
that through the file system to disk
or across the network or wherever
your file systems happen to be.
And there's a daemon in the
system that gets queries from,
you know,
notifications from the default pager.
If one swap file is filling up,
we send a notification up to
that daemon and he allocates
another swap file and creates one
and we start swapping into that.
One really neat feature
that's new to Mac OS X,
for those who are used
to Mac OS X Server,
is now swap files can go away.
And they do automatically.
So if you burst up in your system and
access huge amounts of written data,
anonymous data, and then all of a sudden
deallocate it all,
the, as the data gets freed,
space gets freed up in the swap files,
and then the swap files
are free to coalesce.
And you can actually
take a swap file offline.
So if you want to put a
swap file on one volume,
You could even put it on removable media.
Start swapping to it,
then when you want to unmount that media,
you can say, okay,
unmount that swap file,
and the default pager moves
all the data from that swap
file into the other swap files,
maybe making space available
somewhere else for that data to move,
and then frees up that volume.
So that's a neat,
unique feature that we've
got in the current kernel.
Okay, how does it show all
this funny stuff to you?
Well, what you're going to see when you
look at your applications is this
long range of memory regions in each
virtual memory space of an application.
You're going to see a little bit
that got created here for mapping
this framework and a little bit
that was here for this framework.
All right, they're going to be sparse.
They're typically going to be copy
on write for things like frameworks.
Most of them are not,
you never touch them,
like all your text is
mapped copy on write.
Well,
I don't write text.
Why should I map text copy on write?
Well, debuggers do.
When you run a debugger
on your application,
you would hate to sticking a
breakpoint in one application at a
particular location in a framework.
It would cause every application
to take that breakpoint.
Alright,
so by doing everything copy on write,
you have the ability to come along
and modify just one application.
You're going to see lots of tools.
Hopefully some of you will be able
to go to the tools session later
today or the debugging session
first thing tomorrow morning.
You're going to see a lot of
tools around managing your virtual
memory space of your application.
malloc-debug is probably going to be the
one that you're going to go to first.
Well, maybe second.
You're probably going to go to top first.
Top is going to tell you
how much memory you've got,
how many regions you've
got in your application.
And if you see that starting to leak,
you're going to turn around
and go to malloc-debug.
And malloc-debug is going to
help you walk through each of
your applications in these areas.
There's another neat program
that's not--it's a demo program,
a helper program right now,
it's not finalized.
But I really like it,
not necessarily as a debugging tool,
but as a tool to understand
how an address space or an
application is put together,
and that's the pagewatch.app.
PageWatch is in debug developer tools,
I think, or debug developer applications.
Sorry,
local developer applications on your CD.
And when you bring it up,
it gives you a visual image of
what your address space looks like,
a little square for each page in
the system in your application.
And it tells you whether
that page is present or not.
And you can set it to
scan at certain intervals,
right?
And you can see pages
faulting in and out.
You can also click on another view.
Now, that's the VM summary view.
There's another view that lets you
see each of the individual things
that got mapped into your application,
each library,
and which pages are being used
and how many pages are being
used out of each one of those.
It's really neat just to get a sense
of how an application's put together.
Okay, what's new in Darwin 1.0?
We've got the external
memory manager interface.
That was something that
wasn't in Mac OS X Server.
Now we don't currently have
any need for user level pagers.
This is actually an exportable
interface between the kernels so we
can call out to a pager at user space.
And a lot of people will go, oh,
really neat.
I can go ahead and build
myself my own private pager.
And I can do really
neat things with that.
Well,
in most cases you don't want to do that.
In most cases what you would rather
do is build a file system layer.
Right?
Because you don't want something
that just behaves that way.
Let's say you wanted to
do an encryption pager.
Oh, I could do encryption on my data.
Well, but you want reads and writes
to see that data encrypted or
decrypted appropriately as well.
Right?
If you do it as a file system extension,
the VNode pager I showed you
earlier allows you to go ahead
and access those things for free.
It becomes a pager for free.
Right?
If you do it just as a pager, well,
you've got no way to
access it the other way.
So there's very limited use for
pagers through that formal interface.
But it gives a nice
separation between the two.
And you can access those
things even inside the kernel.
Right?
Another thing that's in
Darwin 1.0 is the ability,
rather than just having an address space,
be a linear list of memory regions.
You may have...
A bunch of things in common
between a bunch of applications.
And so rather than mapping
each one into each application,
you may want to just create one
memory address space that has all
of those files mapped into it.
And then rather than mapping, again,
each individual file
into each address space,
you can take that one address
space and recursively map it into
each of the other address spaces.
So as data appears in
that single address space,
as things get mapped in and out,
they magically appear in the
other address spaces as well.
It's a really neat feature.
Most users won't have direct need for it,
but coming soon we'll actually,
if you look at the bottom one,
where the shared memory part,
shared region part,
we're going to use that to
employ the system frameworks.
throughout the system.
They're all going to be
mapped into this common thing,
and then that common thing is
mapped into each address space.
It provides a level of efficiency
that we don't have today.
Other things coming in virtual memory,
if you were in the file
system session yesterday,
they talked about how the file
system part of the system is
already enabled for 64-bit files,
but
So, the VM subsystem keeps them
from being able to be mapped,
and one of the things,
the first things we're doing is
adding the 64-bit object size support.
And if people are familiar
with the PowerPC roadmap,
there's 64-bit PowerPC processes
coming right down the pike,
and we're looking at ways to
add 64-bit address support.
Now this is a little bit different
than traditional 64-bit systems,
because in the PowerPC roadmap you
can mix 64-bit applications and 32-bit
applications on a single running system.
So we need to be able to
flexibly support both,
and that kind of work is ongoing.
And there's also some changes
in that EMMI layer to add
some efficiencies there.
Okay, so we now have a task,
and it's isolated and it has
one or more threads in it,
and it has its virtual space,
and we may have two of those tasks.
Alright,
but how do they talk to each other?
Now that they're isolated,
we've got to let them talk.
And the way they talk is through IPC.
IPC in Mach has three basic abstractions.
It has ports, which are the endpoints of
communication between tasks.
They're highly restricted.
Each, you cannot send a message to a port
unless somebody hands you a write
to send a message to that port.
And through that restriction we
actually get the basics of how the
security model in the system works.
Right?
But you're only granted access to those
things which the policy makers decide
that you're allowed to have access to.
And by not having access to the
task port for some other task,
some other process like a system process,
you can't do things to that process.
A port set is a collection of ports.
So you can have both sends
and receive rights to ports.
You can implement something so that
someone can send you a message.
And a port set allows you to collect
those into a single spot so you
can have a single thread wait and
receive on any one of those ports.
It's kind of like select sets
or FD sets for file descriptors,
except that they exist forever.
The kernel maintains them and you
can add things to them so you don't
have to construct them on each call.
And where are all these ports maintained?
There's a namespace for each task that,
that maintains the task, the port space.
So here at the bottom
you have this port space,
right, and you may have a port which
gives you the permission for one
task to send a message to another,
right.
And that task may own a port of its own,
right,
that it owns the receive right for.
And so it can construct a message,
not only that sends data,
but it can also send writes
to ports to that other task.
And it can also send memory,
copy on write memory to that other task.
So all of these systems inside of
Mach are kind of recursively defined.
They each depend upon each other
and they each take advantage
of each other's services.
So.
VM uses IPC to implement
itself in certain areas,
and IPC uses VM to send
data to other tasks.
So when you send that message
over to the other side,
and the other guy receives it, virtual,
new virtual memory appears
in that other task,
and now he sees a virtual copy of
what was sent by the other process.
And you also received that port,
so you can now send a
message back the other way.
And through this mechanism and building
up of these little individual ports and
sending writes and sending messages,
all of the interfaces to the kernel
use that mechanism to the Mach part of
the kernel to implement their services.
So when you say task or thread create,
the first parameter to
that is the task reference.
Well, that's really a port write
that gives you the right to
send a message to a task port.
Right.
That sends a message to the kernel.
The kernel processes that request.
If you didn't have a write to
To that task port, you couldn't create a
thread in that task port,
in that task.
But by having a right
to send to that port,
you have the right to do that operation.
That goes into the kernel,
he does the work,
and as a result he sends you back
a right to manipulate that thread.
That's how the kernel works.
This is how the Windows server works.
So when you converse back
and forth between the
Windows server and applications,
the Windows server gives you rights
to access certain core graphic
fundamental pieces of the system.
If you don't have the
right to access that,
you can't.
So you can't trounce
somebody else's window.
As I said,
by using the protection of Mach ports,
you're going to see that each application
ends up having a pile of ports.
Typical application will
have 50 or so ports to it.
These are reference handles to
objects implemented somewhere else,
either in the kernel or
inside a Windows server.
But they can also be things that
you implement and reference,
and give references to other people.
Exception handlers are one of the common
examples from the Mach perspective.
When an exception happens in a task,
we'll send a message to whoever
the exception handler is for that.
Um, that task, whoever registered a port
with us to send a message,
and we'll send a message that says,
"This exception happened." Um,
and that may be your own
task or that may be GDB.
You're going to see
that each application,
almost every time you look at your stacks
or your tracebacks inside of Sampler App,
you're going to see that they're all
blocked waiting on IPC operations,
right, at the very highest level.
That's because almost
everything in the system is,
at its fundamental basis,
an IPC operation.
So when you're waiting
for a semaphore to go off,
or you're in your event loop, right,
for Carbon or whatever, you're going to,
that thread is going to see,
at the very lowest level,
you're going to see that it's
in Mach message overwrite trap.
Today you're going to see that
over and over and over again.
And you've got to realize that, okay,
well that's because everything
degenerates down to a message eventually.
And you're going to see
those things through TOP,
and you're going to see
them through SC Usage.
SC Usage is really nice to see
what you're doing in the system.
And that should be coming up
in the tools session later.
Okay, so how does this show to me?
Like I just said,
each of your applications is
going to have a set of ports
for accessing other things.
But each of your applications is
actually going to have a set of
ports for delivering events to it.
Right?
And at the lowest level they
are a collection of ports.
They're wrapped up in port sets
so that a single thread in your
application can receive them.
Typically your application's
going to be using something
like a Carbon Event Queue.
The Carbon Event Queue
actually internally has a
run loop associated with it.
And that run loop has a
port set and that thread,
eventually when it's
waiting on that event queue,
you're going to see at the lowest
level it's waiting for a message
to come in on that port set.
All right, so all of these things that
deliver events to you are
typically created as ports.
For those that aren't,
there are certain things that are in
CFRunLoop that aren't delivered that way.
CFRunLoop actually
creates a port so that,
and possibly a thread sitting in
that other box to receive that event
and then pass it on as a message,
a simple message that says this
event happened to one of those other
port sets because that's where your
application's thread is waiting,
in that one spot.
And it just tells him to come
over and look at the others.
Right, and the same thing at the
Carbon event loop model,
or the Carbon event queue model.
Things will happen that
aren't delivered by ports,
but because your thread
is waiting for a message,
a port is created to send that,
the notification that happened.
What happened in Darwin 1.0 or Mac OS X?
Well, there were some IPC changes.
One of them allowed that discussion
we just talked about where you may
have a CF run loop and he may have
more than one mode or event queue.
So you're in a certain mode,
you're in a modal environment
where you only have a few
things you want to wait on.
Before, lots of activity had to happen
in order to change the set of
things that you were waiting on.
We added a facility that lets you wait,
lets you put those events into
multiple port sets simultaneously
and then you just have to switch
your set that you're waiting on.
That all happens under the covers,
but you'll see that if
you look at the code.
Coming soon,
as you saw that there were certain
things that cannot be delivered
efficiently through the port mechanism,
and since that's where
your application's waiting,
we had to come up with some other
mechanism to ping pong it over there.
Well, we're not going to do that.
Okay.
But we can do that more efficiently
and so we're creating additional
channel types other than a message
queue so that we can deliver those
events directly to that waiting thread
rather than having to ping pong it.
And there's, there are new IPC,
new IPC APIs coming with those
and related MIG enhancements
to come with those.
Well, you saw earlier that I'm
a part-time MIG pilot.
What is MIG?
MIG is a tool that allows you
not to have to worry about the
details of how this actually works.
It's used for system services.
You typically won't have to deal with it,
but a lot of the interfaces you
may want to call may be defined.
Graphic services use it.
The low-level Mach services use it.
And it's just an IDL that creates, uh,
message formats for you and packages
them up so that you can just do
a remote procedure call model.
Again,
you'll typically use higher level things.
You'll use Apple script or Apple events
in your Carbon application,
where you may get down to a
lower level and use CF messages.
But that's typically where you'd stop.
If you want to go below
that and use Mach,
well we suggest you don't
use Mach messaging directly,
but try and stick with
the interface generator.
There's other things that Mach provides.
Won't have time really to get into those,
but it provides all of the
host resources as well,
the system-wide resources.
Security management, control, rebooting,
all that stuff is a Mach function.
And processor control and statistics.
Coming soon to a processor near you is
power management and thermal management.
A lot of that work is
pretty much ready to go.
Obviously, all of this stuff is not
only as the core of Mac OS X,
but it's also Darwin.
Right?
It's open sourced.
This is in keeping with the Mach legacy.
Mach has always been,
or pretty much always
been an open source thing.
There was that brief period where
OSF did a lot of research and
didn't make it available to anyone
except their paying partners.
But again,
we've taken that legacy and now we're
extending it by adding all of our changes
to Mach into the open source environment.
Obviously, when all else fails,
having that source is a
wonderful form of documentation.
What is going on?
Why is my application
not making any progress?
Well, if it really comes down to that,
you can dive down and look at the source,
because you know that
thing's blocked in a foobar,
you know, Mach message overwrite trap.
Well, what am I, what am I waiting on?
Right?
And you can actually use in really,
really, really bad situations,
because we have open source,
you can actually be debugging the
kernel at the same time you're
debugging your application.
So you can kind of watch
it go through the kernel.
That requires two machines, but again,
if you're really stuck,
it's an interesting
way to look at things.
The roadmap, well sorry,
most of the things that talked
about a lot of this stuff
has already been completed,
a lot of the BSD and file system stuff.
But there's some
interesting sessions left.
There's the performance
tools later today.
You definitely want to look
at that because when you're
tuning your application,
you're going to be looking at things
that show all of these Mach pieces.
There's the feedback forum tomorrow.
Actually,
tomorrow morning at 9 o'clock is the
debugging your Mac OS X application
session at 9 o'clock in the big hall.
I didn't add this to that slide,
but it's probably a really
good session to go to.
And they will dip into a minor
amount of these kind of things.
How, as you're debugging,
you're going to see the
Mach pieces showing through.
And then there's a session
also later tomorrow.
on BSD and how the
BSD environment is made available.
Where else can I find out
about this stuff if I care?
On your CD there's a Kernel Environments
book and you can look at that.
It actually discusses in more
detail a lot of these pieces.
Obviously the Darwin open source,
you can go get that.
And the Mac OS X homepage talks
quite a bit about what Mach provides.
There's also a book,
Programming Under Mach.
It's getting a little bit dated.
You may have trouble finding
it in some of your bookstores,
but you can go to libraries
and pick it up there.
But it gives you a good overall
concept of how Mach is put together.
And who to contact?
John Signa,
if you have business questions.
But you also have the Darwin mailing
list to contact us on technical issues.
Most of us are on the
Darwin mailing list all the time,
watching what's going on.
And with that,
I'd like to invite the rest of the
team up and we can have some Q&A.